septic arthritis of the shoulder is uncommon in adults . it is a surgical emergency as joint destruction occurs rapidly and can lead to significant morbidity and mortality .
a 43 years old male came to our outpatient department with complaints of pain and stiffness of his left shoulder . on examination , his shoulder movements were severely restricted .
further evaluation with mri revealed septic arthritis of left gleno - humeral joint for which emergency arthroscopic debridement was done .
septic arthritis of shoulder may not present with classical clinical features . hence , a through clinical and radiological evaluation will help us prognosticate and treat accordingly thereby preventing complications like septic shock , osteomyelitis .
patients with septic arthritis usually develop moderate to severe joint pain , warmth , tenderness , effusion , restricted active and passive motion , and sometimes redness .
we report an unusual presentation of shoulder septic arthritis in a 43 years old man with no other clinical signs and symptoms of classical septic arthritis .
a 43-year - old man presented to the orthopaedic outpatient clinic with 2 months history of pain and limited range of motion in his left shoulder .
his pain was insidious in onset , mild to moderate in intensity , aggravated by activities and associated with moderate rest and night pain .
patient was diagnosed as frozen shoulder at an outside facility and had been given intraarticular depomedrol 40 mg injection for the same 40 days ago with no improvement in his symptoms .
he is diabetic and has liver cirrhosis and is on treatment . on physical examination ,
the skin colour and temperature of the left shoulder were normal , but the shoulder was tender to touch over the anterior joint line .
mri was obtained [ fig 2 ] which showed extraosseous soft tissue enhancements around left shoulder with soft tissue abscess in inter muscular planes of supraspinatous , infraspinatous , subscapularis .
blood test revealed normal white cell count with normal differential count , crp-13.4 mg / l ( normal<5.0 mg
the erythrocyte sedimentation rate was raised , at 88 mm / hour ( normal range , 0 - 20 mm / hour ) aspiration of shoulder joint was performed and fluid was sent for aerobic and anaerobic culture , afb staining , mycobacterium culture , and mycobacterium genetic testing .
arthroscopic lavage of the joint was done and articular fluid sent for repeat aerobic and anaerobic culture .
joint visualization was markedly limited because of severe inflammation and fibrinous changes of the joint .
the articular cartilages of glenoid and humeral head were completely eroded down to the bone .
susceptibility of the isolate was determined with the disk diffusion method and it was susceptible only to colistin .
3 ) fibrocollagenous and fibrovascular inflammed connective tissue containing proliferated blood vessels and perivascular mixed inflammatory cells and lymphoplasmacytoid cells .
based on preoperative and intraoperative culture report , a definitive diagnosis of polymicrobial septic arthritis of the shoulder was established and patient was treated with combination antimicrobial treatment .
our patient had muted inflammatory response probably due to immunocompromised state ( cirrhosis and diabetes ) which is not uncommon .
most often it is hematogenous seeding of shoulder joint , however it can also happen after intraarticular steroid injections .
septic arthritis of the shoulder is more common in immunocompromised patients and intravenous drug abusers . in this case report , the patient had atypical clinical symptoms and is immunocompromised and his primary source of infection seems to be hematogenous .
our experience with this patient highlights the importance of maintaining high index of suspicion for septic arthritis in immunocompromised patients presenting with atypical shoulder pain associated with stiffness . in the setting of suspected septic arthritis ,
our initial pre - investigation diagnosis was atypical shoulder pain and stiffness of non specific etiology in an immunocompromised patient and infection was part of the differential diagnosis not the only diagnosis .
esenwein et al in his report highlighted the importance of early intervention to prevent chondral damage , osteomyelitis and also to prevent systemic spread .
various authors have highlighted the importance of early diagnosis and management of septic arthritis failing which could lead to osteomyelitis and septic shock . in our patient
, the diagnosis was delayed due to atypical presentation and over reliance on clinical findings at an outside center .
we strongly recommend early imaging studies in immunocompromised patients presenting with shoulder pain and practitioners should avoid loosely diagnosing as shoulder pain with associated stiffness as frozen shoulders .
klinger et al . did a retrospective study on 21 patients who underwent surgical treatment for septic arthritis of the shoulder joint between 2000 and 2007 , and he concluded that patients with symptoms for less than 2 weeks did well with arthroscopic approach and early infection can be managed arthroscopically .
our reports show that arthroscopic washout can give good result even after 2 weeks of clinical symptoms if there is no evidence of osteomyelitis .
septic arthritis of the shoulder is very often due to hematogenous spread and diagnosis is often clinical .
laboratory investigations and imaging studies like mri and usg may be useful in establishing the diagnosis but confirmation is usually by joint aspiration .
patients who are immunocompromised and have insidious onset of moderate to severe pain and which fails to respond to trial of conservative treatment should be subjected to either ultrasound or mri instead of x - ray because very often in these group of patients it is primarily a soft tissue pathology like impingement , rc tear , calcific tendinitis or rarely infections and malignancies .
we recommend that moderate pain of more than 4 weeks duration with severe stiffness in immunocompromised patient ( liver cirrhosis , renal failure , steroid treatment ) should be further evaluated with mri or ultrasound in the setting of normal x - ray and should not be loosely diagnosed as frozen shoulder .
goldenberg in his report emphasized the role of local as well as systemic factors that predispose patients with cirrhosis to gram - negative bacterial joint infections .
malnick also reported a case of spontaneous septic arthritis in a cirhottic patient that was due to e.coli .
our study as well as other studies by goldenberg and malnick highlight the importance of including broad spectrum antibiotics with gram negative cover whilst waiting for final culture sensitivity .
septic arthritis of shoulder may not present with classic clinical features . a through clinical and radiological evaluation should be executed and treatment initiated promptly to prevent complications like septic shock and osteomyelitis .
the case highlights the importance of establishing anatomical and pathological diagnosis using mri in patients with shoulder pain instead of loosely diagnosing them as impingement or frozen shoulder .
the case also challenges the practice of routine shoulder depomedrol steroid injection , in the setting of secondary frozen shoulder , atleast in immunocompromised individuals .
primary idiopathic frozen shoulder is a rare condition and secondary frozen shoulder cases are often due to underlying shoulder pathology .